1. INTRODUCTION

This study aims to compare three classical machine learning techniques: Logistic Regression, Random Forest, and XGBoost on four distinct tabular datasets collected from the healthcare and finance sectors, all of which have varying sample sizes. In doing so, we hope to uncover the most appropriate models for working with limited amounts of collected data. Specifically, we will be examining how dataset size impacts the performance of each technique by assessing the performance and complexity of the techniques' underlying implementations. Ultimately, we aim to identify which techniques produce good results given small amounts of labeled data. 
According to our research, we found that the Random Forest had the highest performance out of all models across three of the four datasets overall. The Random Forest was also very successful when the datasets were medium-sized (1,000+ samples). In cases of smaller datasets, however, the Logistic Regression performed better than both of the ensemble-based models, which leads us to believe that smaller datasets may have problems with overfitting due to complex models.

The dataset that performed the best overall was the Insurance dataset, which has only six features and an overall model performance of greater than 0.94 ROC-AUC. This suggests that the quality of the features matters more than the quantity of the features for classification models.

As a result of this research, we can offer practical recommendations for selecting models when data is limited. The results from our study indicate that for very small datasets (< 500 samples), it may be better to use a linear model. For medium datasets (1,000-5,000 samples), a Random Forest will work very well with little to no tuning of parameters required before using the model.
In the rest of the paper, we will first review work that has been done on learning from small amounts of data and about tabular classification (section 2); then we will describe our datasets and methods for each study (section 3); present results from our analyses, along with a detailed analysis of performance and an overall conclusion (sections 4-5); and finally provide some practical advice to practitioners (section 6).